## 15.2 Lesson Plan - Getting In The CRUD with Sequelize

### Overview
In today's class, we'll introduce new Sequelize methods for updating and deleting records with as well as introduce some useful validations.

##### Instructor Priorities:

* Students should know how to perform each CRUD action using Sequelize.

* Students should become familiar with the "where" query attribute to filter items from our database.

* Students should become more comfortable converting a project using a different ORM to use Sequelize, as well as understand what's needed to set Sequelize up from scratch.

* Student's should also understand how through the use of validations on their models, they can restrict what type of data can be saved into their databases.

##### Instructor Notes:

* Once again, **THIS IS TOUGH STUFF!** This week, tell your class to not feel discouraged if there are concepts that they can't nail down completely. Tell them to try their best, but to speak with you or a TA if they're unsure of anything.

* Be sure to look at the solutions to each activity before the lecture begins, and to run the server files in each folder to see how they should run.

* Make sure you have a MYSQL database named "todolist" created on your machine before class starts. Try and familiarize yourself with how the todolist app is supposed to work.

* Again, **BE VERY CAREFUL TO NOT GO TOO IN DEPTH.** There are a ton of working parts in these directories, but focus on what we mention in the lesson plan.


-------

### Class Objectives

* To provide students a refresher on setting up a project to work with Sequelize.

* To review the creation of models using Sequelize.

* To review Sequelize CRUD methods introduced in the last class and to introduce methods for updating and deleting database entries.

* To introduce the concept of validations and how they can be used to further restrict what kind of data can be stored in the database.

* Students will create a blog app with a content management system that can be used to update it's data.

--------

### 0. Instructor Do: Welcome Students (1 min).
* Say your hellos and welcome your class.


----------


### 1. Instructor Do: Pulse Check and Sequelize Review (10 min)

* Ask students how the week is going so far, and what they think of Sequelize.
	* Answer any questions students might have about using the package

* Give them a quick back and forth on some of the basics of Sequelize.
	* What is Sequelize?
		* An ORM designed for Node that lets users handle complex SQL database queries with JavaScript methods, rather than typing out SQL code.

	* What is a Sequelize model?
		* A representation of a table as a JavaScript object that Sequelize uses to help expedite the coding of data queries.

	* What Sequelize CRUD methods did we already go over?
		* findOne
		* findAll
		* create


----------


### 2. Instructor Do: TodoList Demo (10 mins)

* Praise your students for picking up the concepts you just discussed, but just to be sure you're on the same plane, you have an exercise for them to do.

* Inform students that today they are going to play the role of a backend developer. We have a todo list app that previously was using a simple ORM to communicate with a database, but now we're coming in to perform a few upgrades.

* Open the [`4-Sequelize-Validations-Solved`](Activities/4-Sequelize-Validations/4-Sequelize-Validations-Solved)  folder inside `Activities/4-Sequelize-Validations`. In terminal run `npm install` and then `node server`. Navigate to `localhost:8080` and explain to your students that by the end of class they will have fully converted this todo list app to use sequelize instead of the ORM it's currently using.

*	Let students know that this application makes use of each CRUD action. It allows the user to CREATE new todo items, it READS todos from the database, it allows the user to UPDATE current todo items, and allows a user to DELETE todos.

* Be sure to demonstrate each piece of functionality to the class. You can toggle a todo's edit mode by clicking it. Inform them that they will be converting one piece of functionality at a time, and things will inevitably break temporarily while we're doing that.

* Inform students they won't need to (and shouldn't) touch any front end javascript or HTML.

* Answer any questions before the exercise begins.


----------


### 3. Warm Up: Connect to Sequelize and Create a Todo Model (30 mins)

Slack out the following folder and instructions:

 - Folder: [`1-ORM-To-Sequelize-Unsolved`](Activities/1-ORM-To-Sequelize/1-ORM-To-Sequelize-Unsolved)


INSTRUCTIONS:

1) Create a new local MYSQL database called 'todolist', but don't create any tables.

2) Delete any references to the orm.js file inside the `api-routes.js` file.

3) Delete the config folder.

4) In your terminal, type in the following command: "sequelize init:models init:config"

5) Step 4 should have created a config and a models folder for us. Navigate to the config folder, open `config.json`, and modify the development object's "database","username" and "password" values to match your MYSQL database on your machine.

6) Navigate to the models folder and create a new file called `todo.js`. Create a Todo model with columns for "text" (Sequelize.STRING), and "complete" (Sequelize.BOOLEAN).

7) Navigate to the server.js file and require all of our models by requiring the models folder. Save this to a variable we'll name "db".

8) Sync the models by running db.sequelize.sync() before we start the express server.

9) In your terminal, run "node server". Check MYSQL Workbench to see if a Todos table was created. If so, you were successful. If not, check your terminal for any errors.


----------


### 4. Instructor Do: Review the ORM-To-Sequelize Activity (10 mins)

* When time's up, load up the solution on your machine. Be sure to show students your `config.json` file as well as your Todo model.

* Then highlight the fact that we sync() our models in the `server.js` file before we start our server. This is what ensures our tables are created and ready when we try and start up our express server.

* Show them where our models are required inside of the `api-routes.js` file where will use it in the next exercise.

* Show students how the Todos table its made for us when we run `node server` and our database syncs.

* Answer any questions before moving on to the next exercise.


----------


### 5. Partners Do: findAll and create (15 mins)

Slack out the following folder and instructions:

* Folder: [`2-Sequelize-Create-Read-Unsolved`](Activities/2-Sequelize-Create-Read/2-Sequelize-Create-Read-Unsolved)

INSTRUCTIONS:

1) Open the folder and run `npm install`.

2) Navigate to the `api-routes.js` folder.

3) Add a Sequelize method inside the GET route which finds all of the todos and returns them to the user as JSON.

4) Add a Sequelize method to the POST route to to save a new todo to the database using the data sent to the server in req.body.

5) To test if this worked, open your terminal and run `node server` and navigate to localhost:8080. If you are able to save new todos, you were successful.

6) Hint: Here's a link to Sequelize's documentation for it's models api `http://docs.sequelizejs.com/en/latest/api/model/`


----------


### 6. Everyone Do: Review findAll and create (10 mins)

* Go through the solution as a class.

* Make sure everyone can understand what each part of the new code is doing.

* Print req.body to the console in the POST route and show students the data we're giving to Sequelize to make a new todo.

* Answer any remaining questions questions about this exercise.


----------


### 7. Instructor Demo: update and delete (5 mins)
* Inform students that now they will be working on functionality to delete todos and to update todos.

* Open the solved file [`4-Sequelize-Validations-Solved`](Activities/4-Sequelize-Validations/4-Sequelize-Validations-Solved) and run the program. Show students how they can delete todo items by clicking the `x` button on the todo. Refresh the page to prove that todo is gone.

* Demonstrate how when clicking a todo item, you can update the todos text. After editing, hit "Enter" to finish editing, or click anywhere else on the page to cancel editing. Also demonstrate how clicking the check mark toggles a todo's complete property.  Refresh the page again to prove this works.


----------


### 8. Partners Do: update and delete (20 mins)
* Slack out the following folder and instructions.

  *Folder: [`3-Sequelize-Update-Delete-Unsolved`](Activities/3-Sequelize-Update-Delete/3-Sequelize-Update-Delete-Unsolved).

INSTRUCTIONS:

 1) Open the folder slacked out to you

 2) Run `npm install`

 3) Inside the api-routes.js file, look for the DELETE route and add a Sequelize method to delete the todo with the id available to us in `req.params.id`.

 4) Inside of the same file, look for the PUT route and add a Sequelize method to update a todo with the new todo data available to us inside req.body.

5) Again, you won't need to touch the front end HTML or JavaScript to make any of this work.

 6) **HINT**: you will need to pass in an options object with a "where" attribute into both methods in order to filter these queries to target the Todos we want.
 http://docs.sequelizejs.com/en/latest/docs/querying/#where

7) **HINT**: The method to delete a record may not be called what you think it's called.
 http://docs.sequelizejs.com/en/latest/api/model/#destroyoptions-promiseinteger

 8) Navigate to localhost:8080. If you can update and delete todos without errors, you were successful.


----------


### 8. Everyone Do: Break! (15 mins)


----------


### 9. Instructor Do: Review Update and Destroy (15 mins)
* Slack out the ['3-Sequelize-Update-Delete-Solved'](Activities/3-Sequelize-Update-Delete/3-Sequelize-Update-Delete-Solved) folder inside `Activities/3-Sequelize-Update-Delete` and have students explain to you how how the "where" query attribute works when it comes to filtering the records you want to query.

* Inform students that now that they have a good grasp on CRUD actions with Sequelize, as well as how to filter queries with "where", they already know how to do what they'll be doing 80% of the time with an ORM.

* Answer any remaining questions about this exercise.

* Explain to students that at first the Sequelize documentation can be a little difficult to navigate. All of the model methods with examples can be found here. http://docs.sequelizejs.com/en/latest/api/model/

* Slack out the Sequelize CRUD actions cheat sheet [`CRUD Actions Cheat Sheet`](../Supplemental/SequelizeCRUDActionsCheatSheet.pdf)


----------


### 10. Instructor Do: Validations (5 mins)
* Explain to the class that as some of them may have already noticed, there's a small flaw with our todolist application. And that is that while our Todos table's text column won't save any data type other than a Sequelize.STRING, it is possible to save a todo with empty text or even one with a null text value.

* While it is possible to restrict this functionality client side (and we definitely should at some point), if someone knew how to use Chrome Developer Tools, they could circumvent any restrictions we put in our front-end JavaScript.

* Knowing that any code we write on the client is potentially available for the user to tamper with. Ask the class what steps we might be able to take on the back end to validate what we're receiving to put into our database.


----------


### 11. Everyone Do: Discuss With Partners (10 mins)

* Have the class discuss with their partners for a few minutes about what options we may have to further restrict what kinds of data can be saved into our Todos table.

* After a few minutes have the volunteers suggest their solutions. Most likely suggestions will be to have a conditional that checks the value before trying to insert it. Some may suggest that Sequelize may have something built in for this.

* Inform students that Sequelize does indeed have built in validations and flags we can include with our models.

* An example of a validation might include making sure that text is a URL or email, or that a credit card number is formatted correctly.

* A flag might include making sure a value is not null before before entering it into the database or having a default value for a field if one is not supplied.

* The difference is that flags are ways for us to implement MYSQL constraints we're already familiar with such as "NOT NULL" or "DEFAULT" and validations are additional built in or custom methods we can run before Sequelize inserts a record.


----------


### 12. Students Do: Sequelize Validations (20 mins)

* Slack out the following folder in `Activities/4-Sequelize-Validations`

	* Folder: [`4-Sequelize-Validations-Unsolved`](Activities/4-Sequelize-Validations/4-Sequelize-Validations-Unsolved)

INSTRUCTIONS:

1) Open the folder slacked out to you.

2) Run `npm install`.

3) Modify the `todo.js` file so that the Todo model has a flag to prevent the text field from being null. Also add a validation to make sure the text field is at least one character, but no more than 140 characters.

4) Modify the complete field in our Todo model so that it supplies a default value of false if one is not supplied during Todo creation.

5) Once a Sequelize model has been created and sync'ed for the first time, any changes we make to our Todo model won't be picked up by our database. The easiest way to get around this during the development process is to pass "{ force: true }" as an argument into our sync method inside `server.js` file. This will make it so that every time we run our app, our Todos table will be dropped and recreated with the new configuration.

6) Navigate to localhost:8080 to test that this worked. Try to save a Todo without any text in it, and then try and save a Todo with over 140 characters. If you see errors in your console that have to do with validation, you were successful.

7) **Big Hint**: Sequelize documentation on validations can be found here http://docs.sequelizejs.com/en/latest/docs/models-definition/#validations


----------


### 13. Instructor: Explain Error Handling (10 mins)

* Demonstrate to students that while our validations seem to work, they throw errors whenever they fail, essentially crashing our entire node application.

* This is Sequelize's default behavior. If we had our app deployed to Heroku with actual users, these types of errors would cause the site to go down.

* Thankfully Sequelize has a built in catch() method we can use in order to gracefully handle any errors without crashing our entire app.

* Demonstrate adding a catch promise to the end of each Sequelize method inside of the api-routes.js file as seen in [`4-Sequelize-Validations-Solved`](Activities/4-Sequelize-Validations/4-Sequelize-Validations-Solved) .

* Show students how now when we try and do something our validations prohibit, we can still continue to use our app. Also be sure to show students how we're gracefully handling the errors by console.logging them. If we wanted we could also send back an error message to the user with res.json.

* Answer any remaining questions and slack out [`4-Sequelize-Validations-Solved`](Activities/4-Sequelize-Validations/4-Sequelize-Validations-Solved)


----------


### 14. Instructor: Review and Dismiss Class (10 mins)

* Inform the class that we've just covered a lot of ground today. If they feel they haven't caught onto everything we just went over, encourage them to check out the solution files and browse through the Sequelize documentation. Of course, they can also talk to you or a TA between classes for one-on-one advice.

* Let them know that the best way to really learn a new library or framework is to build something with it. Encourage them to go through and redo the exercises if needed.

* Class dismissed.


### Copyright
Coding Boot Camp (C) 2016. All Rights Reserved.
